Script for video for LWV-OR Election-Method Informational Update

My name is Richard Fobes. I'm the author of this how-to book on creative problem solving. I'm proud to say that it has been published around the world in ten languages.

While writing this book I realized that most of the world's biggest problems have remained unsolved for so long because we use very primitive vote-counting methods.

Using my understanding of mathematics, which I learned while getting a bachelor of science degree in physics, I created a vote-counting method that I named VoteFair popularity ranking. It looks very deeply into the preference information on what are now called ranked choice ballots. I included a one-paragraph description of the method in that book.

Later I found out that a professor named John Kemeny had created a mathematically equivalent method. But his method counts voter opposition, whereas my version counts voter support. To make a long story short, my version is now known as the Condorcet-Kemeny method.

Later, after writing a short second book, I wrote this third book titled "Ending The Hidden Unfairness In U.S. Elections."

When I published this book about twelve years ago there were no names for the different kinds of ballots. Instead, back then, academic journal articles used verbs like "rank" and "rate" and adjectives like "ordinal" and "cardinal," but there were no self-descriptive names for the different kinds of ballots.

So I created the name "single-mark ballot" for the kind of ballot we use now. That name now appears in Wikipedia and other places. Currently I prefer the name "single-choice ballot."

Back when I wrote that third book the name "ranked choice ballot" did not exist. So I created the name "order-of-preference ballot" and used that in the first edition. Then, in the second edition, I used the name "1-2-3 ballot," which was suggested by another election-reform advocate.

The fact that election-method terminology is still evolving is very important because some of the best ways to reform elections do not yet have names. And some election-method reforms were named just a few years ago, which means they aren't yet well-known.

Alas, most of the methods that are best-known are flawed. These flawed methods include the best-known ones in Europe and Australia.

Yet some elements within some election methods, including some less-known methods, are well-designed.

Consider the voting method named Zweitmandat, which translates into English as "second mandate." It's used in a region of Germany. It's flawed because it does not collect enough information on the ballot. Yet part of the method consists of a useful element that I described a dozen years ago in my Ending The Hidden Unfairness book. I did not give a name to that element. Only within the last year did I see that the element has a name. I don't know the German name, but apparently the English translation is "best loser" or "best near-winner."

Also in my book I described how ranked choice ballots can be counted by focusing on one pair of candidates at a time. I did not name that counting method in my book. Now I refer to it as "pairwise vote counting."

Unfortunately pairwise vote counting is easily confused with the category name "Condorcet method." That's because most, but not all, Condorcet methods use pairwise vote counting, and most, but not all, methods that use pairwise vote counting are Condorcet methods. Here's a Venn diagram that shows how these terms are related yet different.

Now you're ready to understand my favorite election method. I designed it, and I call it VoteFair Ranking. It has many elements. Some of its elements are still beginning to have names.

The details of VoteFair Ranking are explained in my third book. But that book is 340 pages long, so it's too long to compete with well-crafted videos. So here I'll summarize VoteFair Ranking by listing some of its notable elements and categorizations.

* It uses ranked choice ballots.
* It uses pairwise vote counting.
* If a ranked choice paper ballot is marked in a way that's legible, then it's countable.
* For single-winner elections it uses what has become known as the Condorcet-Kemeny method.
* Here's an important element, but it doesn't yet have a name, and I don't know of any other election method that includes this element. The two biggest political parties, whichever they are, will nominate the second-ranked candidate as their second candidate in the general election. Under current conditions this means there will be two Republicans and two Democrats in each general election. Soon I'll explain why this change will reduce the influence of money and increase the influence of votes.
* Yet another element within VoteFair Ranking is "dual-member" districts. This means that each current district is doubled in size, and the enlarged district elects two legislators, instead of just one legislator.
* The second of these two legislators is elected using VoteFair representation ranking. This kind of ranking ensures that the second-seat winner represents the voters who are not well-represented by the first-seat winner.
* VoteFair representation ranking is a party-agnostic method that's similar to the single transferable vote in terms of what it accomplishes.
* The term party-agnostic means the method ignores political parties. This party-agnostic kind of proportional representation is different from another kind of proportional representation I'm about to explain.
* The districts are enlarged a bit further to allow some seats to be reserved as statewide seats.
* Voters are asked to rank the political parties, or at least indicate their favorite party.
* As done in many European nations, party-based proportional representation calculations are done to identify how many statewide seats each party earns.
* The candidates who fill the statewide seats are determined using what is now called the "best loser" method.
* That explains how VoteFair Ranking elects legislators, mayors, and governors.
* But US presidential elections require special considerations. State-by-state differences in weather and voter access can continue to be balanced using the numbers named electoral votes, although one fewer electoral vote per state would be fairer. The voters in most states would vote for presidential candidates using ranked choice ballots. Those ballots will be counted using pairwise vote counting, with each state announcing its own pairwise vote counts. Those counts will be scaled using the adjusted electoral votes, then those counts are simply added across all 50 states. This approach will easily and fairly reveal which presidential candidate is really the most popular.

That's an extremely brief summary of VoteFair Ranking as I described it in my book.

Later I developed something called VoteFair negotiation ranking. I designed it for use by members of a legislature or parliament or Congress when they vote on proposed laws. I created the interactive website at NegotiationTool dot com to demonstrate how this method works.

When I was developing the VoteFair Ranking system, I wrote and debugged software to make sure that both the method and the software worked the way I expected. The latest open-source versions of this software I now keep available on Github in the CPSolver account, where CPSolver stands for creative problem solver (and not crossword puzzle solver).

The first public use of the early VoteFair Ranking software was for a poll among students at a school that was, at that time, named the National College of Natuopathic Medicine. The students wrote ranking numbers next to six spending categories for student-body funds. My software calculated the popularity of the categories from most popular to least popular. The published results were regarded as meaningful and useful.

Here I'll point out that unlike other methods, the Condorcet-Kemeny method always identifies the full popularity of all the candidates -- or choices of any kind -- from first-most popular, and second-most popular, and third-most popular, all the way down to least-popular. This full ranking reveals that it really does look deeply into all the preference information on the ballots.

After that first public use I created the vote-counting service that still runs at VoteFair dot org. That software runs automatically, for free, with no signup required. This means I don't follow who uses it. Every few years I take a peek at how it's being used. From those peeks I've seen that it's been used by many hundreds of clubs, school classes, business departments, and other groups of people around the world to elect officers and rank many kind of choices.

An early user of that VoteFair service was the San Francisco Bay Area Curling Club. The admin for their elections wrote these words about using VoteFair Ranking: quote -- Our organization has had several successful elections of club officers in the past few years, including an annual election a couple of weeks ago with the most candidates ever, and all the results have been recognized as very fair -- unquote. In another message he said the club also used the service to select a new team name.

Starting in the second year of the TV show American Idol, I hosted VoteFair American Idol polls. Each week typically hundreds of American Idol fans ranked the contestants who had not yet been eliminated. At the poll's peak there were two thousand unique voters each week.

That experience working with real-world voting data taught me many insights such as: how and how often voters attempt to vote tactically instead of sincerely, what causes voter turnout to increase and decrease, and how long it takes voters to learn to rank more than just one or two favorite choices.

I'm mentioning these experiences with VoteFair American Idol polls because election-method experts recently have realized the importance of analyzing real-world voting data. During the decades before that, academic research about election methods tended to focus on mathematical proofs about whether or not it was possible for an election method to yield a result that violated one of several fairness characteristics. Soon I'll point out the limitations of that kind of analysis.

Of course there were other American Idol polls. But those approaches basically just asked the question "Who's your favorite?" It turns out that asking voters to rank the singers yields much richer data, which makes it possible to get much more meaningful results. In fact, a website named Idol Analytics stated that my VoteFair poll results were -- quote -- better than any other single index that I assessed -- unquote. FYI, the word "index" covered the innovative tactic of measuring busy signals on the official voting phone lines.

A big advantage of pairwise vote counting is that anyone can look at the numbers and verify that their favorite was preferred by fewer voters than the winner. This comparison was insightful during the third season of American Idol when Jennifer Hudson was eliminated way too early. As I explained in that week's commentary, her premature departure was caused by vote splitting and tactical voting. These are the same voting weaknesses that undermine the fairness of governmental elections around the world.

The VoteFair poll software has access to all the raw ballot data, so for comparison purposes it calculates the most-popular choice according to instant-runoff voting, and plurality voting. The plurality comparison is useful to verify that the people who voted in the VoteFair American Idol polls roughly matched the voters who participated in the higher-traffic polls.

The instant-runoff voting comparison revealed the frequent failures of that method to correctly identify the most popular choice.

Naturally many people would like to do such comparisons using data from governmental elections that use ranked choice ballots. Alas, that data is not available. The official election data is only available in the format that's used to do instant-runoff voting and the single transferable vote, neither of which involve using pairwise vote counts. Yet the best single-winner methods need access to those pairwise vote counts.

This is why I've spent time explaining that there is lots of evidence that supports the vote-counting methods I promote. But that evidence cannot yet be duplicated using data from governmental elections. This is one of many barriers that block election-method reform.

Of course my VoteFair Ranking service is not the only such service. A professor at Cornell University maintains such a service under the name Condorcet Internet Voting Service. That service has handled thirty thousand polls over two decades. These polls include elections of officers in non-governmental organizations. That service allows the poll administrator to choose from several different kinds of Condorcet methods, with the current default being the Condorcet-Minimax method. Recently this single-winner method has been emerging as the most popular single-winner method among election-method experts.

These other ranking services, plus the wide availablity of open-source software, means that better vote-counting methods are getting used widely. It just isn't yet happening in governmental elections.

As a clarification, the Condorcet-Kemeny method is not a viable choice for governmental elections in the near future. That's because it looks so deeply into the ballot preference information that its computation time quickly increases as the number of choices increases. In the method's defense I'll point out that a variation of the method, such as by starting with a quick elimination of the obviously unpopular candidates, would be viable for governmental elections.

Now that I've explained what the VoteFair Ranking system is, and that the key elements of VoteFair Ranking have been used by many people for many polls and small elections, I'll acknowledge that the full VoteFair Ranking system is too advanced to be adopted all at once. Instead it needs to be adopted one or two elements at a time.

The first element that needs to be adopted within a state is to use ranked choice ballots in general elections and count them with a method that's better than instant-runoff voting.

The second element that's needed is for that state's Republican party and Democratic party to each nominate a second candidate who moves on to the general election. This change will defeat the most significant money-based tactics now being used to corrupt election results.

My Ending The Hidden Unfairness book describes these money-based tactics. However in that book I did not name them. Lately I've been calling them blocking, concentration, and splitting.

A clear example of the blocking tactic occurred in 2008, after I wrote that book. The election-method experts working for big-business-oriented political action committees steered lots of money to Barack Obama for the purpose of blocking Hillary Clinton from reaching the general election. That part of their tactic was successful. However, the experts and big-business donors were shocked to discover that their racism was not shared by the majority of voters. That was a clear example of the blocking tactic.

Vote splitting, of course, occurs when two or more similar candidates are liked by the majority of voters. The money tactic is to give campaign contributions to the least-popular of the similar candidates. This tactic reduces the number of votes going to the most popular of the similar candidates, which also reduces how many votes the money-backed candidate needs to win.

The money-based tactic named "concentration" is the inverse of splitting. Money is concentrated on a single candidate who has demonstrated a willingness to oppose the reforms that the majority of voters want. This funding is arranged privately, not publicly. It includes withdrawing money from any additional puppet-like candidates who have less chance of winning.

The combined tactics of splitting, concentration, and blocking accounts for why both of the main candidates in general elections almost never include the reform-minded candidates that most voters would prefer.

I have not seen any academic journal articles that explain these money-based tactics. Nor have I seen any articles that research how well the various vote-counting methods defeat these tactics.

This isn't surprising. After all, university professors get most of their funding from government sources. The wealthy business owners who control governments around the world do not knowingly fund that kind of research. And tenure is unlikely to be given to a professor who wants to focus on such research. The result is a scarcity of academic journal articles about better vote-counting methods, and almost no research about which methods can best defeat money-based tactics.

As yet another barrier, these missing topics in academic journal articles causes a similar lack of knowledge on Wikipedia. Remember that vote-counting methods are mathematical, and Wikipedia editors are very vigilent about requiring references to peer-reviewed sources of information for mathematical articles.

To partially compensate for this limitation in Wikipedia coverage, a separate wiki is maintained at Electowiki dot org. It's articles are written and edited by election-method experts around the world who communicate via email.

The barrier against getting new vote-counting methods into Wikipedia can be, and has been, overcome in cases where money is available. That's because funding can pay for people to promote a method to a regional political party, and that makes the method notable, which qualifies it to appear on Wikipedia.

In the United States there are three organizations that have this level of funding for promoting specific methods. The Center for Election Science promotes Approval voting. The Equal Vote Coalition promotes STAR voting. The biggest one is the FairVote organization. That's FairVote, not VoteFair. They promote a specific version of instant-runoff voting, and they promote the method known in academic literature as the single transferable vote.

All three of these organizations try to hide the fact that there are yet better ways to count ranked choice ballots.

Those of us who best understand the mathematics behind vote-counting methods lack the funding to pay for any marketing or networking. This is partly why methods such as the Condorcet-Minimax method and the Condorcet-Kemeny method are not as widely known, even though they yield much fairer results.

There is yet another way in which knowledge about the best vote-counting methods is blocked.

In Canada, the Ontario government created a citizens assembly to study election methods. The professor who taught the citizens about election methods steered them to favor a party list method. When he explained the difference between the methods known as the closed party list and the open party list, he used a slide that pointed out that closed party lists are more common than open party lists. The slide also pointed out that the closed version is simpler for voters than the open version. Not surprisingly the citizens chose the closed party list to appear on the ballot initiative that was presented to Ontario voters. I helped some Canadians to defeat that ballot initiative.

Why is the closed party list method so popular? Because it increases the control of party insiders. So of course MPs (that's members of parliament) are given permission to vote in favor of adopting that method. In contrast, when a parliament is presented with the option of adopting the open party list, the party leaders tell their MPs to vote against it. That's because the open version shifts control away from party insiders toward voters.

So it's important to understand that many vote-counting methods get adopted for reasons that are not in the best interests of the voters. This is yet another reason why there is not yet any nation that uses a great election system.

In fact, most nations use single-choice ballots or ballots that are marked in ways similar to Approval ballots. This means that most voters around the world cannot indicate which of their marked choices they like better. In other words, most democracies use the most primitive kinds of ballots.

This brings us to the situation in Australia. They use three different kinds of vote-counting methods. Some of their elections use plurality voting, which is what we use here in the US. Other elections use ranked choice ballots with instant-runoff voting, which they call "the alternative vote." Yet other elections are multi-winner elections that count ranked choice ballots using the method that academic literature refers to as "the single transferable vote." After awhile Australian voters learned that they needed to most often give the highest ranks to the candidates from the two or three biggest political parties. This happened because Australian political parties were unable to shift their identities to fit three different election methods. This example demonstrates that in addition to adopting better ballots it's also essential to count these better ballots in ways that are compatible with other election methods still being used elsewhere in the state or nation.

When the election systems of other nations are examined it's important not to assume that there is fairness just because there are fewer symptoms of unfairness. Specifically, it's not difficult to make the problem of gerrymandered districts disappear. And it's not difficult for political parties to add rules that increase the percentage of female politicians who get elected. Yet that doesn't mean that the majority of MPs better represent the voters.

As a more familiar example of this concept, the United States adopted primary elections to solve the obvious problem of vote splitting that was happening in what we now call general elections. But now, the vote splitting happens in primary elections, where it's more difficult to notice because the winner is always from the correct political party.

After general elections are reformed to allow more than two candidates, political parties can go back to each party offering more than one candidate. This single change will defeat all three of the money-based tactics, namely blocking, splitting, and concentration.

As a related point, many reformers want to make it easier for third political parties to get their candidates elected. Yet if that's done without also forcing the Republican party and Democratic party to be controlled by votes instead of money, then full representation of all the voters is not achieved.

The best vote-counting methods defeat attempts to use tactical voting. In turn this makes it easier to understand how to mark the ballot. In other words, sincere voting is easier to understand than tactical voting.

The best vote-counting methods require ranking candidates. Some people think that's too difficult so they promote a ballot that involves fewer marks. My experiences with the VoteFair American Idol polls taught me that after someone marks a ranked choice ballot a couple of times they quickly learn how to rank more and more of the choices.

From answering questions about VoteFair Ranking I also learned that if pairwise vote counts are readily available for interested voters to look at, then it becomes easy for interested people to judge whether the results are correct and fair.

Now I'll shift to explaining yet another barrier that blocks better vote-counting methods.

Many election-method experts criticize their non-favorite methods by pointing to fairness criteria that the method "fails." These fairness criteria have names such as monotonicity, no favorite betrayal, and cloneproof. But the word "fails" just means that the method has a non-zero failure rate.

About five years ago I began pointing out the need to MEASURE the failure rates. In other words we need to know HOW OFTEN the method fails each fairness criterion. About a year ago I saw an academic journal article that acknowledges the need for this measurement approach. It calculated failure rates for a few methods, although not for the well-known fairness criteria because these are more challenging to measure.

About two years ago I began to write software that measures the failure rates for clone independence and independence of irrelevant alternatives for a variety of methods being considered for use in Oregon. I chose these two fairness criteria because in my opinion they are the easiest to exploit using money-based tactics.

Here's a scatter plot from the calculations. It shows that the method I'll be talking about soon has smaller failure rates than instant-runoff voting and, of course, smaller failure rates than plurality voting. It shows that the Condorcet-Kemeny method has a very favorable balance between these two criteria. The data for STAR voting looks nice but that method would have higher failure rates in real elections because it's much more vulnerable to tactical voting. These calculations only simulate sincere voting.

These kinds of measurements are beginning to replace the excessive focus on whether a method has a zero failure rate or a non-zero failure rate for each fairness criterion.

Keep in mind that many years ago mathematicians proved that it's impossible for any vote-counting method to have zero failure rates for all the criteria. So it's useful to use measurements to determine which methods offer the lowest fairness rates for the most important criteria.

I predict that when these better comparisons become possible, then the elements of VoteFair Ranking are likely to become recognized as having the best balance of low and zero failure rates for the most important criteria.

In the meantime, the first step toward election-method reform that I recommend is to adopt, for use in general elections, the election method named Ranked Choice Including Pairwise Elimination. This method's name is abbreviated as RCIPE and pronounced "recipe."

This is the election method currently specified for the Ranked Choice Oregon ballot initiative.

The RCIPE method has these characteristics:

* It uses ranked choice ballots.
* It eliminates candidates one at a time, in elimination rounds.
* In most cases the eliminated candidate is the one who's highest-ranked on the fewest ballots.
* If the elimination round includes a "pairwise losing candidate" and that candidate is not the same as the candidate who is highest-ranked on the fewest ballots, then the pairwise losing candidate is eliminated instead.
* The pairwise losing candidate is the candidate who would lose every one-on-one match against every not-yet-eliminated candidate.
* Most importantly, nearly any way of marking a ranked choice paper ballot is countable. This includes marking two or more candidates at the same preference level.

Essentially the RCIPE method is the instant-runoff voting method with the addition of a safety net. This safety net prevents serious mistakes such as the one that happened in the 2009 mayoral election in Burlington Vermont.

In other words, the RCIPE method compensates for the failure of instant-runoff voting to look deeply into all the preference information on all the ballots.

Looking ahead farther into the future, the method known as the Minimax method would also work well. This election method has three variations, any one of which would be a good choice.

So in one sense the RCIPE method provides a stepping stone to the Minimax, Kemeny, and other better vote-counting methods, including proportional representation methods.

Now I'm going to shift to a broader perspective.

When the topic of election-method reform comes up, most people regard the topic as esoteric. Yet a big reason we have less warfare is that voting has replaced small-scale warfare. In fact voting arose from warfare. When two armies with the same weapons faced each other, both sides counted the number of enemy soldiers. Then the smaller army usually agreed to concede some of what it was fighting for.

Now, instead of soldiers fighting with weapons, courtroom lawyers fight with documents, Wall Street traders fight with buy and sell orders, politicians fight with words, and citizens fight with marked ballots. In most of these fights the biggest conflicts are about money.

Yet when election-method reforms are promoted, some people say or think "let's not complicate how we vote" and "we already know how to count votes" and "if it were such a big advantage it would already have happened" and "I don't want to bother learning something new" and "we don't know what might go wrong if we change."

These are similar to the kinds of reactions that greeted Arabic numerals when they first arrived in Europe around the year 999, which is when Pope Sylvestor the Second was elected to become Pope. As a student he had learned how to use Arabic numerals so he could do math calculations incredibly fast compared to other Romans, who were still using Roman numerals. Back then people reacted with words or thoughts such as "we already know how to count" and "we don't want to bother learning something new" and "that change isn't going to affect much" and Christian church leaders said "those Arabic numerals come from the enemy of our religion."

Yet that simple math concept of using the digits zero through nine and multiplication tables dramatically improved daily life for most citizens within a relatively short time. I recall that my high school history book glossed over why the effect was so dramatic, so here's a reminder because it parallels what's happening today.

During Medieval times European banking families basically couldn't hire non-family employees to do their accounting because that too easily led to embezzlement or accounting mistakes, or both. When Arabic numerals arrived it became practical for a bank to hire some accountants who tracked credits and hire other accountants who tracked debits. That became practical because calculations were done faster than with Roman numerals. When the credits and debits did not match, the mistake was tracked to an accidental mistake or an attempt to embezzle. The result was less stealing and fewer accounting errors.

As a further advantage, it had been impractical to use Roman numerals to multiply or divide, which is needed to accurately calculate interest rates.

This change in banking, which first happened in Italy, increased the trustworthiness of the bigger banks. In turn, Italian merchants and traders were able to carry written documents instead of always carrying gold, silver, coins, and other valuables for payment. These written documents were useless to highway robbers, so highway robbery decreased. In turn, this increased the safety of travel between cities, which increased commerce. And it increased the sharing of knowledge between cities. This faster spread of products and knowledge led to the Scientific Revolution, which led to the Industrial Revolution, which eventually led to the modern technology we take for granted today.

Today we are at a similarly huge tipping point. Adopting pairwise vote counting will enable voters to elect the reform-minded politicians we want. In turn, those politicians will reform laws that, in turn, will dramatically increase widespread economic prosperity. And that prosperity increase will be as dramatic as what civilization experienced coming out of Medieval times.

The last chapter of my Ending The Hidden Unfairness book explains some reasons that fairer elections will increase economic prosperity. Here are a few reasons:

* Trust in government will increase because there will be fewer laws that favor aggressive big businesses who fight against consumers. As examples of this corruption, tax breaks and legal monopolies allow pharmacutical companies to overcharge for medicines, allow sugar sold in the United States to be priced higher than the sugar that's sold on the world market, and allow big businesses to pay wages that are lower than what employees would accept if they didn't have to rely on their employer to pay for health insurance.

* Business tax rates will increase for financial institutions on Wall Street and other businesses that are not difficult to do yet impose high fees that leave consumers with less spending money. In contrast, business tax rates will decrease for businesses such as manufacturing and software development and product-design businesses, which attract money from other nations and are challenging for other nations to duplicate. These business tax-rate changes will better match the economics of supply and demand, including the brain drain that motivates too many college students to become lawyers and bankers instead of writers and entrepreneurs.

* Of particular interest to me is that patent laws will change to make it possible for individual inventors to make a living by inventing. This is the unfairness that shifted my path from becoming an inventor to becoming an internationally known creative problem solver, and then to become an advocate for election-method reform.

In other words, currently there are lots of corrupt laws that basically steal money from our wallets, which leaves less money for us to buy products from other businesses.

This pattern of corrupt laws across many industries reveals an interesting irony. The owners of big businesses don't realize that their biggest competitors include the owners of other big businesses in different industries. Each business owner who gives lots of money to politicians to get laws that favor their business is like a person cutting too big of a slice of economic pie. They neglect to notice that there are so many other business owners also cutting oversized slices of economic pie for their businesses that consumers have fewer dollars to spend on what their business sells.

Fairer laws would dramatically reduce this cross-industry fighting between big businesses. Remember that not fighting with physical weapons has left civilized people with more time and more resources. In a similar way, when businesses in different industries stop fighting each other for low tax rates and effective monopolies, people will have more money to buy products from more of those businesses, and that will increase widespread economic prosperity.

The economic gains will be as dramatic as the gains that took Europe out of Medieval times. Alas, only in hindsight will it become clear that election-method reform was the tipping point.

Now that you better appreciate the importance of election-method reform, it's tempting to think there's no big hurry to adopt these reforms.

Alas, the longer we wait, the more suffering occurs. Not just the economic kinds of suffering such as excessive costs for consumers, having to work for less-ethical businesses, and lawyers wasting their brainpower on destructive activities instead of constructive activities.  And it's not just about the suffering here in the United States. There are countless children, women, and non-wealthy people living in nations such as Afganistan, North Korea, Russia, and China who are suffering terrible oppression.

Recall that the Cold War with Russia ended because oppressed Eastern Europeans revolted against their corrupt governments because they saw that electing leaders through voting was causing dramatic economic prosperity in North America and Western Europe. In a similar way, yet higher levels of democracy will yield yet higher levels of widespread economic prosperity wherever meaningful election reforms are adopted. The resulting prosperity will inspire citizens in oppressed nations to demand higher levels of democracy for their governments.

The broader pattern is that humans have become much more civilized by fighting in courts using laws and legal documents instead of fighting on battlefields with physical weapons. Yet the laws that get written by money-backed politicians often exploit the majority of voters, who are also consumers, employees, and shareholders.

To reach even higher levels of civilization we need laws that are written by reform-minded leaders who get elected by votes, not money. Adopting ranked choice ballots and pairwise vote counting is the tipping point that will increase a region's economy to dramatically higher levels of economic prosperity.

As I said at the beginning, most of the world's biggest problems have remained unsolved because currently we use very primitive vote-counting methods. 

So let's move beyond our primitive level of partial democracy to reach full democracy. The widespread economic rewards will be beyond what most people living today can imagine.

..............................

wording to use elsewhere:

Ranked choice ballots can be counted in many, many ways. Yet nearly always a paper version of a ranked choice ballot uses the familiar column labels "first choice," "second choice," and so on.

In contrast, rating ballots do not have a standard way to name the columns. Some election-method experts prefer names such as Excellent, Very Good, Good, Acceptable, Poor, and Reject. Most other election-method experts prefer numbers, but there is not much aggreement about which numbers to use.

This difference between ballot conventions would become important if STAR voting were to become widely adopted. That's because there are many good ways to count ranked choice ballots, but STAR ballots are incompatible with other rating methods. The promoters of STAR voting avoid mentioning this incompatability, and they hope that ranked choice ballots will stop getting used. Of course that's unreasonable.
