The Prosperity Tipping Point
----------------------------

by Richard Fobes

(Script for video)

When I was a kid I always sat between my sister and brother in the back seat of our family's station wagon. I was the youngest, and I had the shortest legs for dealing with the bump in the floor that was normal for cars back then, which was in the 1950s and 1960s.

One day, at the beginning of a long road trip, it dawned on me that my legs had reached the floor. I didn't like straddling that bump and I longed for a window seat, so I asked my mom for a window seat.

She sighed and said "OK, let's give it a try." I switched places with my one-year-older brother. At long last my feet had room to move, and I had a glorious view out the side window without anybody's head blocking my view.

Within just a few minutes my sister and brother were fighting. After dealing with them my mom said to me "Do you mind moving back to the middle?" I said "I don't mind now that I know WHY I'm in the middle."

That was the day it dawned on me that I had become a peacekeeper. In that case between my sister and brother.

Since then I've been a peacekeeper between housemates, between friends, among neighbors, online, and more.

Now I'm stepping forward to help serve as a peacekeeper for the biggest conflicts around the world.

Yet I don't simply want peace. That's just the absense of fighting. What I want is the OPPOSITE of fighting.

One way to understand this opposite is through the word "community."

I've enjoyed a sense of community in a variety of situations. In households, among neighbors, and at two universities.

Yet the most frequent kind of community I've experienced is among social dancers.

Unlike other forms of dancing, social dancing involves switching partners after every song or two. In the best dance communities the dancers don't just dance with their favorites. They also dance with beginners and less favorites. Ideally everyone is dancing, so there is no audience.

I admit that dancing is a foolish thing to do. It's illogical. We move a lot and yet we get nowhere. At least not physically.

But in spirit, we fly! Our spirits soar!

Of course I seek that joy for myself. Yet I gain even more joy when I'm able to put a smile on the face of the woman I'm dancing with.

That joy in dancing is a huge contrast to the so-call real world.

The world of work. Competing for jobs. Businesses competing for customers. Lawyers competing in court. And political parties competing for votes.

These conflicts in the real world either directly or indirectly involve money. So in the real world we are always fighting for prosperity.

I believe we can reduce lots of our real-life conflicts in innovative ways.

As an example, consider the conflict between criminals and us non-criminals. I believe crime can be reduced by adding another rating to movies and computer games. The added rating would indicate how many years a person would spend in prison if they were to do everything shown on the screen.

Now that you know I have odd ways of thinking, allow me to suggest something unusual.

Instead of focusing on reducing fighting, let's focus on REPLACING immature ways of fighting with more mature ways of fighting.

We already do that when lawyers fight in a court of law. That change has dramatically reduced warfare. And it has dramatically increased economic prosperity because we don't waste time fighting to get things and defending ourselves from theft. Not to mention not wasting lives.

Another modern kind of fighting is voting.

During an election we basically have a fight between an army of Republicans and an army of Democrats. In fact this is how voting evolved. Two armies near each other would count the number of enemy soldiers, and the smaller army surrendered in exchange for a reasonable compromise.

Now that the fighting is done using ballots instead of swords and bullets, women are counted. And during the last 200 years an increasing number of people have been getting the right to vote.

Yet we continue to mark ballots as if there are only two choices.

This unfairness can be, and is, exploited by wealthy business owners who want laws that give their business a legal monopoly, or government contracts, and other advantageous arrangements.

This exploitation is possible because the leaders of the Republican army and the leaders of the Democratic army are getting their marching orders from the same people.

The people who control both political parties are the people who give the largest amounts of money to politicians. Their contributions are so large because typically they earn five to twenty times as much money in ways that most voters do not like.

Consider the sugar monopoly.

Those of us in the United States pay a much higher price for sugar compared to the price everywhere else in the world. This is because US laws prohibit sugar from being imported from outside the US.

This is a sweet deal for some people in Florida. That's where most of the crops grown for sugar are farmed. The farmers don't get rich, but the owners of sugar refinery businesses earn huge profits.

If this sugar monopoly was the only monopoly written into law, or if there were just a few such monopolies, that wouldn't be a big deal. But our federal and state laws are written in ways that create thousands and thousands of monopolies.

Other monopolies allow pharmacutical companies to overcharge for medications, allow the healthcare industry to overcharge for treatments that are chosen for reasons other than what's in the best interests of the patient's health, allow cable companies to overcharge for entertainment, and allow phone companies to overcharge for cell phone service.

To understand the combined effect of these monopolies, imagine that the US economy is a cherry pie. Imagine that each person who benefits from a monopoly is like a person cutting themselves a bigger-than-fair slice of economic pie. The more people who do this, the less economic pie remains for the rest of us.

In addition to taking extra money out our wallets, we are left with less money to buy other things from other businesses.

This arrangement leads our overall prosperity into a downward spiral. Less money for consumers leads to less money for businesses, which leads to lower salaries, which leads to even less money in our wallets and bank accounts.

One way out of this downward trend would be for fewer young people to choose to become lawyers, bankers, IRS tax collectors, and insurance sellers. These professions pay well, but they waste the minds of people who would contribute much more to the economy if they became engineers, scientists, entrepreneurs, product designers, software developers, and screenplay writers. These are the kinds of professions that give us products that can be exported around the world in return for shiploads of money.

As a kid growing up during the 1950s and 1960s I remember this kind of widespread prosperity. Back then factories throughout North America were making products that were sold around the world. The products were bought by the people in most other nations. That's because their factories had been bombed into ruins during World War Two. In other words, North America's monopoly on unbombed factories is what brought widespread economic prosperity to those of us living here during the 50s and 60s.

That was when our family took road trips in our station wagon. Back then I rarely saw homeless people. I seldom heard about drug abuse. And I don't recall hearing about any school shootings, although Wikipedia tells me there were a couple of those. And consider that in those days it was harder to hide poverty because highways went through downtown areas.

Back then, practically everyone who wanted a good-paying job could work in a factory or sell products and earn enough money to buy an automobile, and maybe buy a house. The higher incomes resulted in higher income taxes, and that allowed the government to build lots of roads and bridges. And it became affordable to protect elderly people from hunger and cold. And there was money to fund explorations into space, including landing men on the moon.

But by around 1970 our monopoly on working factories had ended. That's when I remember stores selling imports from Japan such as plastic toys, transistor radios, and eight-track tape players.

That taste of economic prosperity at the national level showed us something important. Lots of big problems disappear when there is widespread prosperity.

Currently, instead of living in times of prosperity, we are living during times of widely increasing poverty. The symptoms of this widespread poverty are dramatic increases in homelessness, malnutrition, drug abuse, and national debt. Plus, lots of people are basically forced to take low-paying jobs because that's the only way they can get covered by health insurance.

What always follows poverty is despair. In turn, despair fuels violence and distrust. The most notable examples have been the physical attack on Congress, the widespread distrust of the Covid19 vaccine, and increases in violence against strangers.

What can we do to gain the benefits of economic prosperity?

Let's start by understanding how wealthy business owners control both political parties. They hire election experts to guide their campaign contributions using three tactics: blocking, splitting, and concentration.

A clear example of the blocking tactic occured in the 2008 presidential election. Some of the election experts hired by Republicans recommended giving lots of money to Barak Obama for the purpose of blocking Hillary Clinton from reaching the general election. That part of their tactic was successful. However, those experts, and the Republicans who supplied that tactical money, were shocked to discover that their racism was not shared by the majority of voters.

The simple way to defeat this money-fueled tactic of blocking is to change general elections to allow the Republican party to offer two Republican candidates and allow the Democratic party to offer two Democratic candidates.

But this change requires collecting more information on the ballot.

On our ballots we need to ask each voter "Who is your first choice?" and "Who is your second choice?" and "Who is your third choice?"

What we use now only allows us mark just one candidate. With this approach the election would always be won by the political party that offered one strong candidate and one weak candidate, assuming the other party offers two strong candidates. That's because votes are split between the two similar candidates.

In fact this vote splitting is why both political parties adopted primary elections.

Now the vote splitting is hidden in primary elections. It's not noticed because the winner is always from the correct political party.

The inverse of vote splitting is concentration. That means that the biggest campaign contributors concentrate all their money on a single candidate in each primary.

Just a dozen years ago when I published my book titled "Ending The Hidden Unfairness In U.S. Elections" there were no names for these two kinds of ballots. So for our current type of ballot I used the name single-mark ballot. That has changed into single-choice ballot. For the ranking kind of ballot I used the name order-of-preference ballot in the first edition, and the name 1-2-3 ballot in the second edition. In recent years the name ranked choice ballot has emerged.

Notice that names do not exist for things that are new. I experienced this limitation when my brother and father asked me why I didn't want a camera when I was a teenager. I said I was waiting for the electronic kind of camera. They didn't know what I was talking about. If I had known they would become known as digital cameras, that would have caused even more confusion.

Perhaps what I'm calling pairwise vote counting will be named something different in the future. We don't yet have time machines that go forward in time. We only have the time machines called history books that take us back in time.

Perhaps the knowledge that we are just now getting around to naming important components of vote counting might help you appreciate why, in general elections, we have to hold our nose as we mark the lesser of the two evils.

It's natural to assume that other nations do their voting in ways that give fair results. Alas, they too have elections that are heavily controlled in ways that involve money. And it happens because of an interesting feedback loop.

Governments supply most of the money that pays university professors to conduct research in science. But political science is different. The people who control the government block any funding about how better vote-counting methods would reduce the influence of money in politics. Yes there are a few mathematics and statistics professors who study vote-counting methods, but if their journal articles mention any money advantages they refer to other money topics, such as the cost of conducting elections.

You might assume that Wikipedia would have articles about better vote-counting methods. Yes there are a few. But they cannot mention the connection between money and vote-counting methods because Wikipedia requires footnotes that point to academic journal articles, and those don't exist.

There is a separate wiki named Electowiki where a few math geeks who want fairness write articles about better vote-counting methods.

Civilization is at a turning point.

We need wider awareness of something called pairwise vote counting.

At this point it's natural to think: "We already know how to count votes." "This pairwise thingy sounds like something we've gotten along fine without, so why do we need it now?" "This sounds essoteric."

Interestingly these are the same kinds of reactions that greeted the most important innovation in civilization since the times of the Roman Empire.

Back then the innovation was known as Arabic numerals. These are the digits zero through nine. When those digits, and the multiplication table, arrived in Europe, the reactions were similar. At that time Italians were using Roman numerals. Those are the ones where three marks indicate the number three, and the letter C indicates one hundred.

Resistance to Arabic numerals was strong. Many Christian churches declared them to be a sin to use. Part of their bias was because Christians regarded Arabic-speaking Muslims as their enemy.

Some kings outlawed the use of Arabic numerals.

And learning to use multiplication tables was no more fun then than now.

It took two centuries for Europeans to adopt the digits zero through nine. That's a delay of 200 years. Specifically the year 999 is when Pope Sylvestor the Second became the pope in Rome, and he had learned them in North Africa, across from Spain. Two centuries later, in [year] Leonardo from Pisa, who today we know as Fibonacci, published the first European book about Arabic numerals.

Just as we chuckle about the foolishness of Italians a thousand years ago, future generations are going to chuckle at how long it has taken for pairwise vote counting to get adopted.

We have a similar situation today. Pairwise vote counting was first written about in the 1600s and 1700s. That was 300 years ago! And many academic journals have described it many times in the 1900s.

Pairwise vote counting has been used countless times for electing officers in non-profit organizations and schools. And it's been used in countless polls and surveys.

So what blocks it from getting used in governmental elections?

Most people assume that the way to find a good election method is to look at what's used in other nations. Alas, most of those methods were chosen to take control away from voters rather than give voters more control.

As one example, the Canadian province of Ontario created a citizens committee that studied the vote-counting methods presented by the professor who mentored that group of interested citizens. The method they chose, the closed party list, was a method that gives political parties even more control over elections. When that recommended change was put on the ballot it was defeated by people who understood that it just hides unfairness behind a superficial appearance of fairness.

Gerrymandering is a well-known unfairness. And small political parties not winning a fair share of seats in parliament is another well-known unfairness. Methods such as the closed party list easily make those unfairnesses disappear. The unfairness is still there, it just isn't easy to measure in numbers.

What's going on? To better understand why pairwise vote counting sounds so simple yet is so powerful for getting fairness, let's look at how the digits zero through nine took Europe out of the Medieval stage and paid for the art during the Italian Renaissance of the late 1400s (and early 1500s?). And that prosperity fueled the scientific age of the late 1700s. And it fueled the Industrial Revolution during the late 1700s and early 1800s.

Back in Medieval Europe when people travelled between cities and towns they were often robbed by highway robbers. So traders, the ones who buy and sell goods, had to hire guards to protect their gold, silver, gems, and other valuable items, which they needed for purchases.

Back then the biggest banks were small, they were usually owned and run by a single family, and they were located in a single city. They couldn't grow by hiring people to help with the bookkeeping because eventually some of those hired workers were likely to embezzle money.

Also, hiring more accountants would increase the frequency of accidental accounting mistakes. Such mistakes would reduce the willingness of a trader to trust their wealth with the bigger bank.

During that time Italians used Roman numerals for counting, for addition, and for subtraction. The process was slow, and vulnerable to making mistakes. When they needed to multiply two numbers, that was difficult. When they needed to divide one number by another number using Roman numerals, that was unthinkable. And remember that percent interest calcualtions require either multiplication or division, or ideally both.

The adoption of Arabic numerals at a bank made it easier to add and subtract and dramatically easier to do multiplication and division. As a result, it became possible to copy another innovation used by Arabs along the Silk Road.

They hired one group of accountants to keep track of debits, and another group of accountants to keep track of credits. When the debits and credits did not match, an investigation would discover either an embezzler or an accidental mistake.

These changes banks enabled banks to grow in size and trustworthiness. Larger banks made it possible for traders to carry their wealth as documents on paper that were useless to highway robbers. As trade between cities increased, prosperity increased for many reasons that economists can explain.

This huge increase in prosperity financed the artists of the Italian Renaissance, such as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. There were countless other benefits, including the building of some of the beautiful cathedrals that still stand in Europe. Mostly because of adopting Arabic numerals.

The recent arrival of computers makes pairwise vote counting trivial to adopt for elections. In turn, we as voters finally will have the power to elect politicians who better represent us, the majority of voters.

And that will bring widespread economic prosperity for multiple reasons.

The boost in consumer confidence alone will fuel some of that prosperity.

More prosperity will come from ending monopolies that are unethical or have outlived their usefulness.

With more money in our wallets, we as consumers will buy more products. That will further enrich the people who own the businesses that provide useful services and desireable products.

If you're thinking that the comparison with Arabic numerals is essoteric, then you probably struggled when you studied physics. That's because physics makes heavy use of division, often disguised using words such as ratio, proportion, rate, and the word per. So being able to do division is at the core of sending people to the moon, and bringing them back, building big bridges, building ever-better automobiles, building computers and the internet, developing vaccines, calculating interest rates, and countless other miracles of our so-called "modern" age.

Once again civilization is at a tipping point where improvements in counting will lead to gains in economic prosperity that are so immense that they are difficult to imagine.

Since it's difficult to imagine, consider that the basic level of democracy we have today has almost completely brought an end to physical fighting between Protestants, Catholics, Jews, Muslims, Buddists, and agnostics. Especially in large businesses where these people cooperate with each other, even though the members of these religions still fight against each other elsewhere in the world.

Yet the conflict continues between greedy wealthy business owners and those of us who aren't. That fighting goes on in elections. Not only here in the US, but in other so-called democracies around the world.


....
EXTRA PARAGRAPHS:

Part of the reason you haven't heard about it is that most new knowledge about math comes from academic professors who do research that's funded by their government. But what government is going to fund research about better ways to vote?

This lack of funding to study better vote-counting methods results in very few articles in academic journals. In turn, Wikipedia does not have up-to-date information about this subject because Wikipedia editors reject math information that isn't backed up by academic journal articles.

Now it becomes clear that we need to be using much better vote-counting methods than what we've seen in any nation.

The concept of "pairwise" is already well-known in the world of team sports. Each team can only play against one other team, one pair of teams at a time. That's what the word pairwise means.

Unlike some other vote-counting methods that are more familiar, pairwise vote counting looks deeply into the preference information that's marked on a ranked-choice ballot.

Having written a how-to book on creative problem solving I can assure you that solutions exist for even the biggest problems we face.

We can fly. We can create wonderous communities. We can lead lives that are less like fighting and more like dancing.

I've been blessed to get a window seat where I can see the future. We don't need to let immature impulses guide our behavior.

I now get a window seat every time I drive. And I get to see the road ahead. And what I see is that future generations will enjoy widespread economic prosperity, much less warfare, a huge middle class, less economic suffering, fewer lawyers, and incredibly beautiful music.

If instead we had full democracy, the candidates in general elections would be problem-solving leaders instead of special-interest puppets.
