
poster-images-begin

arrange in three descending rows, four items per row, so panning is continuous

title:
13 Biggest Secrets of Math

subtitle:
How to Bring Joy and Simplicity to Math Education


1
Algebra is about solving mysteries

images: two kids with magnifying glass looking at paper on table

2
Division is also for comparing

image: multi-tool with knife and less-visible multiple tools

3
Fractions are for communication

image: mouth speaking fraction "two thirds" to ear

4
Decimal inches are superior to fractional inches

image: decimal ruler, ten inches

5
Units, pick one for calculations, use any for measuring and communication

image: two teaspoons of salt and four cups of flour

6
Triangles deserve deep understanding

image: three-dimensional, two parallel lines and two crossing lines forming two triangles

7
Math history enhances understanding math

image: Ancient Roman scratching head, holding scroll showing fraction VI/XIV

8
Terminology and precise definitions seldom convey insightful concepts

image: student, spelling bee setting, saying "an improper fraction is ..."

9
Math testing undermines math teaching

image: student in dungeon, in chains, doing math exercises

10
Calculus and advanced algebra are valuable for scientists, mathematicians, and the testing industry

image: Copernicus with planet device, with planets and ellipses swirling in background

11
Math notation needs updating to match digital and audio technology

image: person speaking to ear with cupped hand, "a squared minus x divided by square root of b"

12
Statistics and probability are misunderstood counting shortcuts

image: normal curve with colorful segments

13
Geometry is beautiful except when it's used for torture

image: spirograph and beautiful equation plot

----


section-0-introduction-begin

If you think math is difficult to learn, it's probably because schools failed to teach you these thirteen math secrets.

Fortunately it's not too late to learn these secrets.  It doesn't matter if you are young or old.  It doesn't matter how much math you did or didn't learn in school.  And it doesn't matter whether you think you do or don't know how to "do math" when numbers are involved.

Shortly you will understand why current math education methods fail to bring joy and simplicity to math education.

Better yet, just by watching this video you will quickly gain valuable new math insights you can apply the next time you need to "do math."

Also, understanding these math insights will give you real-life advantages over artificial intelligence, even though AI currently can ace college-level math exams.

Let's start this journey now.

----


section-1-details-begin
1: Algebra is about solving mysteries

Image: young Albert Einstein scratching head in classroom, with other kids in background

The great mathematician Albert Einstein, when he was a child, struggled when he was first learning algebra.  Fortunately a wise uncle advised Albert to think of algebra as a mystery where the purpose is to become a detective and discover the hidden identity of a Mister X.

Image: words: mystery, secret, hidden, clue, puzzle

Imagine the fun children could have if elementary-school teachers presented mysteries and puzzles with clues, secret knowledge, and hidden insights.

The basics of algebra can be, and should be, taught starting at an early age.

Specifically, soon after learning addition and subtraction, kids can learn about the equal sign, and that adding and subtracting the same number to or from both sides of that equal sign is a useful way to calculate an unknown quantity.  A year or two later they can learn the trick of multiplying and dividing both sides of an equation by the same number.  These simple math tricks are the foundations of algebra.

During this early learning it's important to ignore algebraic notation.  For example, they should be allowed to use either uppercase or lowercase letters to represent unknown values.

They should learn to use the asterisk symbol for multiplication so the letter X can be used in mysteries as the unknown number.  As a reminder, spreadsheets and computer programming languages use the asterisk to indicate multiplication for the same reason, to avoid confusion with the letter X.

The math mysteries should only involve unknown numbers and specific numbers.  This means not teaching them the concecpt of a "constant," which is an unknown number that cannot be calculated from the available clues.

It's especially important to not teach young kids about algebra's "order of operations."   Later you'll learn why this shortcut has been obsolete for centuries.  Instead, when the order of calculations is important, teach kids to draw circles or rectangles around groups of numbers to show grouping.  The satisfaction of removing these lines after doing the math operations inside the lines can become part of the joy of solving mysteries.

Kids do need to learn about negative numbers, probably not too long after they learn multiplication and division.  Yet negative numbers are easy to understand if they are introduced wisely, using techniques you'll soon learn here.

When these students grow up and reach high school, they won't have to waste time learning the basic concepts of algebra.  They will have deeply learned how to solve math mysteries based on clues and limited information, which is the biggest challenge in algebra.

During high school they spend time memorizing algebraic notation and terminology long enough to get into college and graduate from college.  But after that, those algebra details, including polynomials, logarithms, and the order of operations, can be forgotten.  That's because relatively few jobs require understanding those concepts.

Solving simple math mysteries gives children practice looking at clues, discovering patterns, and struggling to gain insights.  That's what algebra is really about.  And that's what real-life problem solving is about.

----


section-2-details-begin
2: Division is also for comparing

Did you get caught in the trap of thinking about division as if it's mostly about splitting a whole pizza into equal-size slices?  And dealing with fractions?

Image: pizza slices, fractions

If so, your math teachers failed to explain that division is a tool that has many different uses.

As an analogy, the excessive focus on division as a tool for splitting is like giving someone a multi-tool or swiss army knife and only showing them how to use the knife blade.  The many other fold-out tools within the multi-tool are also available, but ignored, and unused.

So here's the next big secret.  When you get stumped by a real-life math problem, solving the math probably involves division.

Why division?  If the math just involves addition and subtraction, the process for solving the math problem would be obvious.  That's what basic accounting is, and it's easy to understand.

Multiplication might be needed, but that's also easy to recognize.  Basically it's a shortcut for adding the same number again and again, for a specified number of additions.

But division is different.  To use the mystery metaphor, division has many disguises and aliases.

And it has many uses.

Division is especially useful for comparing.

A simple example is calculating miles per hour.  A car's distance traveled is divided by the time it takes to travel that distance.  If instead someone expresses their speed as seventeen miles in twenty-three minutes, that's difficult to compare with another person who traveled those seventeen miles in twenty-seven minutes.  It's much easier to use division and then compare fourty four miles per hour with thirty eight miles per hour.

The word "per" in miles per hour reveals the need for division.

Similarly the word "percent" provides another way to compare numbers.

Here are yet more words that indicate a need for division: proportion, scale, ratio, rate, slope, and reciprocal.  Remember these terms.  They reveal that division is involved.

Alas, schools delay teaching these deeper uses of division.  Sometimes they aren't learned until high school.  That's way too late to be teaching that division provides multiple ways to compare times, distances, areas, volumes, weights, and more.

Even worse, the failure to fully teach the "why" behind division makes later academic subjects harder to understand.  In fact, many high-school and college students struggle to understand chemistry, physics, trigonometry, and statistics because they never fully learned the many uses for division.

Another source of confusion comes from using more than one symbol for division.  In elementary school the symbol has dots above and below a horizontal line.  And often in math textbooks, division is represented by one number above a horizontal line and the other number is below the line.  Yet when students begin using computers they discover they can't find those division symbols on the keyboard.  Also those division symbols don't show up in spreadsheet formulas.  The division symbols taught to children have been replaced by a slash.  So of course we should at least introduce the slash notation at an earlier age.

Here's another tip about division.  If you aren't sure whether the bigger or smaller number is entered first or second on a calculator, ask yourself if the result of division should be bigger than one, or smaller than one.  If bigger, the bigger number is entered first.  If the result should be smaller than one, the smaller number is entered first.

Real-life math problems would become so much easier to solve if students were taught to understand what division really does.  It does a lot.  It's especially useful for doing comparisons.

----


section-3-details-begin
3: Fractions are for communication

Images: ancient Romans

When someone asks you to fill their glass "two thirds full," that's much clearer than asking you to fill it "sixty six percent full."

This simple scenario reveals that fractions are very useful for communication.

However, fractions are not useful when doing calculations.  In that case, a fraction is a division task that has not yet been done.  This is the third big math secret.

Unfortunately schools waste countless hours teaching students how to add and subtract fractions.  That's not a useful skill in any modern profession.

You might disagree if you are a carpenter who uses a tape measure, or if you sew fabrics to make clothes.  In these cases, please keep reading because the next secret will save you lots of time.

To repeat, adding and subtracting fractions expressed in numbers is not useful in the modern world.  So when you see or hear a fraction with specific numbers, recognize it's a useful way to communicate a quantity.

You should continue to use fractions when you communicate quantities, such as refering to a half cup of flour and a third of a teaspoon of salt.

But when you hear a fraction and need to use that numeric information to do math, the first step is to divide the top number by the bottom number.  Then it's easy to combine that result with other numbers in a calculation.

----


section-4-details-begin
4: Decimal inches are superior to fractional inches

Possibly the biggest loss of joy in math education happens when young students learn to use a ruler marked in quarters, eighths, and possibly sixteenths of an inch.

Splitting an inch into quarters and eighths has been obsolete for at least a few centuries.  Yet students in the United States are required to buy rulers with these obsolete markings.

And some adult professions still require employees to use fractional inches.  Carpentry and sewing are two such professions.

Either as a student or an employee, if you still use rulers or tape measures marked with fractions, it's time to buy a ruler and tape measure with marks for decimal inches.

You will be amazed at how much easier it is to add and subtract decimal inches.

Some educators think we should avoid fractional inches by switching to the metric system.  Nope!  That misunderstanding is explained in the next math secret.

Instead schools should be asking students to buy a ruler that shows decimal inches, where each interval between marks is one tenth of an inch.

Students need to learn the pattern of decimal intervals.  Specifically, after finding the larger tic mark at the half-way tic mark in an inch, the smallest tic marks to the left of the half-way tic mark are numbered one through four, and the remaining four smallest tic marks are numbered six through nine.

This same pattern, but in a smaller size, appears on a ruler marked in centimeters.  So learning decimal inches makes it much easier to learn the metric system.

Here's another important change.  School rulers should go up to ten inches, not twelve inches.

When the topic of percentages arise, the ten-inch ruler will have provided a useful way to judge percentages from zero to one hundred.  Students will immediately realize each tenth of an inch is simply one percent of the ruler's total marked length.

As a further advantage, a ten-inch decimal ruler provides a handy way to teach young children how to add and subtract integers up to one hundred.  Addition goes to the right.  Subtraction goes to the left.  The bigger marks keep track of the tens digit, the smaller tic marks keep track of the units digit.  Although this exercise can be done on a foot-long ruler, the extra two inches distract from the simplicity of the decimal system.

Workers in the construction industry already can buy a "decimal tape measure," which is sometimes called an "engineering" tape measure.

Alas, for people who do sewing, cloth tape measures marked in decimal inches are currently very hard to find.  That will change soon.

Of course lots of instructional videos and written materials still require an understanding of fractions of an inch.  That's not a problem.  Switching between decimal inches and fractional inches is easy.  Just use a tape measure that shows both fractional and decimal inches.  Converting measurments just requires tooking across to the opposite side, the one with the different markings.  You can measure and calculate using decimal inches.  When you receive a fractional number, or need to tell someone else a fractional number, just look across the tape measure to see the equivalent number.

Let's stop wasting lots of school time, and stop taking the joy out of math.  Stop insisting that inches must be measured using fractions.  That skill became obsolete centuries ago when decimal numbers arrived.

----


section-5-details-begin

5: Units, pick one for calculations, use any for measuring and communication

Images: clock, moon, stopwatch, kitchen scale

Europeans use the metric system, which measures time in seconds.  Yet two European friends don't say "Bye, see you in six hundred and four point eight kiloseconds" instead of saying "Bye, see you in a week."  Everyone, worldwide, speaks using the same familiar time units we use in the United States, namely minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, and years.

Some people think we should adopt metric units in the kitchen for food prep.  Yet that misses the point.  Recipes can continue to specify quantities in tablespoons, teaspoons, and cups.  And we can continue to conveniently specify other food quantities in pints, quarts, and liters.  And we can continue to use yards for football fields, and feet for cutting lumber, and inches for clothing sizes.

Only when we need to do calculations do we need to choose just one unit for each measurement category.

This concept is similar to the distinction between fractions and decimal numbers.  Fractions are fine for communication, but decimals are needed for calculations.  In a similar way, any unit can be used for communication, but choosing just one unit per category is necessary for doing calculations.

Many scientists promote the idea of switching to the metric system.  Yet if a reporter asks a scientist how long it will take a spacecraft to reach the moon, the scientific answer expressed in seconds isn't useful.  Instead the time in seconds needs to be converted into days to be meaningful for non-scientists.

Some people promote the idea of using the metric system for kitchen measurements of volume.  Yet even Europeans who use the metric system often measure food quantities using a weight scale, not by using containers measured in cubic millimeters or cubic centimeters.

If food ingredients are measured using an electronic weight scale, an expensive scale is needed.  That's because it must be accurate for both large quantities, such as flour for baking, and small quantities, such as for salt and spices.  Getting these proportions wrong is devastating for baking.

Cheap plastic measuring scoops and cups easily handle this dramatic range of volumes.  You can choose scoops and cups that match whatever units the recipie specifies.  Or, you can use a smartphone to take a picture of the recipie, and then ask artificial intelligence to display or print the recipie with all the conversions done.

When you don't have a computerized way to convert units, here's a tip.  You can multiply a number times the equivalent of the number one.  For example, sixty minutes per hour is essentially the number one.  So you can mulitiply sixty times a number in miles per minute to convert into miles per hour.

Let's teach students to communicate using whatever measuring unit fits the situation.  And let's teach students that calculations require converting each number of the same type into the same unit.  Then, after calculating, that unit can be be converted back into a meaningful unit for communication.

----


section-6-details-begin

6: Triangles deserve deep understanding

Even before children learn how to add and subtract they can draw three lines on a sheet of paper.  And they can be taught to draw those lines along a straightedge, which can be a piece of wood or plastic that has no numbers or markings.  And they can recognize the shape of three intersecting lines as a triangle.

At that point they are ready to learn to draw a map.  Indoors the map can be of the schoolroom or an assembly hall.  Outdoors the map can be of fenceposts and building corners, and possibly trees.  To draw this map there needs to be two tables that are not too close to each other.  On a piece of paper the child should draw two Xs where they imagine the tables will be located on their completed map.  And, using a straightedge, they should draw a line between those two Xs.

At one table the child rotates the paper so that line points in the direction of the other table.  Next, the child draws lines that point to distant places such as room corners and fenceposts.  The closer end of each line needs to pass through the same X on the paper.  Then the child moves to the other table, and rotates the paper so the first line points back to the first table.  Finally, the child draws lines that point to the same room or schoolyard locations, but that pass through the X that represents this second table's location.

The map is completed by using the straightedge to draw lines that represent walls, fences, and buildings.

This simple exercise teaches young kids how to draw a map.  After these student learn multiplication and division they are ready to measure distances on their map.  They can even use their algebraic mystery-solving skills to figure out how to measure those distances.  They can measure some of the actual distances to confirm correctness.  And they can measure distances they cannot measure directly, such as the distance to a farther building.

They also can figure out how to measure the height of a tall tree or a tall building.

All of this math learning is based on a simple characteristic of triangles.  If two triangles have the same angles, the ratio between two sides of the small triangle equals the ratio of the same two sides of the large triangle.  You recognize the word "ratio" is a clue that division is needed, right?

That's the basis of map-making and surveying.  It's also the basis of trigonometry.  And it's a fundamental part of geometry.

Here the math secret is that a deep understanding of triangles at an early age will make it much easier to understand advanced math topics, especially division.

By the time students reach trigonometry class they will already understand the trigonometric functions named sine, cosine, tangent, arcsine, arccosine, and arctangent.  These are simply ratios among the sides of a right triangle.

When students later learn about graphing linear functions, they will discover the edges of the paper have been playing the role of the X and Y axes.  This means a specific point on the paper has an X value equal to the the distance to the paper's left edge, and has a Y value equal to the distance to the paper's bottom edge.

By the time students reach geometry class they will already understand foundational concepts such as identifying equal angles, parallel lines, and the characteristics of triangles that include a right angle.  This preparation will allow high-school geometry teachers to more quickly teach college-entrance geometry topics, such as the two-column layout of math proofs, the cleverest steps in Euclid's proofs, and non-Euclidean geometry.

By the time students reach physics classes they will already understand the ratio between horizontal distances and vertical distances, which in physics is called the inclined plane.

When students reach calculus classes, they will realize the concept of a derivative, which is expressed as dy divided by dx, can be thought of as the height of a right triangle divided by the width of that triangle.

Let's teach foundational concepts about triangles during much earlier years in school.  Let's not delay the subject until those concepts are needed in advanced courses such as geometry, trigonometry, physics, and calculus.


Images: triangle with inner triangle and horizontal decimal ruler and vertical decimal ruler

Animation: smaller triange moving within larger triangle three times the size, showing proportionality.

----


section-7-details-begin

7: Math history enhances understanding math

Which math event led to the decline of highway robbery and the begining of the Italian Renessance?

Why do hotels not have a thirteenth floor?

Why were logarithms especially useful for a couple of centuries?

Is learning algebra's "order of operations" really an important math skill?

Young students deserve to learn the math history that hides behind these and other math-related questions.

Consider the first question.  Highway robbery was a normal part of travel back when Romans built the first highways.  There were no banks in Europe to keep track of money flowing between European cities.  So merchants and wealthy people had to carry coins, jewels, and other valuable objects when they traveled between cities.

At that time math in Italy was done using Roman numerals.  The transition to the digits zero through nine was popularized around the year one thousand when a Bishop named Gerbert of Aurillac became Pope Sylvester the Second.  He had learned to use Arabic numerals and recognized their superiority.  Prior Popes had declared it was a sin to use Arabic numerals.

That math event made it affordable for wealthy Italian bankers to hire enough accountants to track wealth transfers between cities, including auditing calculations to ensure accountants didn't steal coins as they counted them.  This is why we can drive down a deserted highway and not worry about highway robbery.  Unlike coins and jewels, highway robbers can't use the bank documents we carry.

This historic example reveals to young children why math is so important to learn.  Specifically, when students experience how difficult it is to divide two numbers using Roman numerals, they understand why early Europeans learned to add and subtract fractions instead of just doing the division calculations implied by the fractions.  And they appreciate that multiplying and dividing isn't as difficult as it was for people in the ancient past.

Interestingly, in the future, when students learn the awkwardness of adding and subtracting fractions, even using the digits zero through nine, they will wonder why those of us living today are still measuring inches using fractions, even though fractional inches should have become obsolete centuries ago.

Perhaps one reason math history isn't explicity taught is it might reveal some of our current math education traditions to be embarrassingly obsolete.

If you're wondering why logarithms were especially useful for a couple of centuries, it's because it provided a shortcut for doing division and multiplication.  For awhile this trick was done using printed tables of numbers.  Then it was done using a slide rule.  Now that everyone has a computer in their pocket, this logarithmic trick has become obsolete.

If you're wondering why hotels don't have thirteenth floors, consider that getting stuck dividing the number thirteen by any other number is frustrating, and therefore would have been unlucky back before the digits zero through nine arrived.  That frustration still shows up in the English language because numbers ten, eleven, and twelve have special names, but starting at thirteen we switch to the "teen" naming convention.  The centuries-old reputation of thirteen as unlucky would make the thirteenth floor of a hotel a tempting target for mischevious young troublemakers.

To appreciate why algebra's "order of operations" notation was invented, consider how ancient mathemeticians wrote math equations.  One method was to write equations in sawdust or sand sprinkled on a table.  When printing technology was adopted, it was useful to keep equations small to reduce paper consumption.  When quill pens were used for writing, fewer dips of the pen into an inkwell was an advantage.  Those limiations have been obsolete for centuries.  So when you "do math" as an adult, use as many parentheses as you want to keep track of the order in which operations need to be done.

Math history, if taught well, is not only facinating and insightful, it's inspiring.  So let's use math-history stories to inspire joy in students.  They can appreciate their struggles are tiny compared to what scholars experienced centuries ago.

----



section-8-details-begin

5: Calculus and advanced algebra are valuable for scientists, mathematicians, and the testing industry

Calculus is breathtakingly beautiful.  Using it led to being able to calculate the exact position of a planet at any moment in time.  Integrals allow us to exactly calculate the area under a polynomial curve.  Derivatives allow us to exactly calculate the speed of a falling object at every moment during its fall.

Yet climbing the "advanced-placement" mountain to glimpse the beauty of calculus consumes too much time, effort, and money considering that very very few professions require using calculus for any calculations.

In a similar way, advanced algebra is filled with beautiful concepts that involve vectors, matrices, advanced trigonometry, and imaginary numbers.  Yet those topics also aren't used in hardly any professions.

So why have schools built a well-traveled road to the top of a mountain for a quick view of the mathematical beauty in calculus and advanced algebra?  There are two reasons.

The more noble reason is the hope of training future scientists who will pioneer advances in software, electronics, biochemistry, satellites, and space travel.  And they want to train future engineers who will pioneer new products, better bridges, and faster computers.  These frontiers have become the battlegrounds for nations competing against each other for economic advantages.  This is why lots of tax money is spent on education for training scientists and engineers.

The uglier reason for focusing on seldom-used math concepts is that lots of businesses earn lots of money testing students on the advanced math topics of calculus, advanced algebra, and advanced trigonometry.  Additional businesses profit from preparing students to be successful when they take these college-entrance exams.  And universities can gain prestige and charge higher tuition if more of their graduates enter high-paying professions that involve higher levels of math.

Fortunately the most useful parts of calculus and advanced algebra can be moved into earlier grade levels.  This approach will free up time for high-school students to learn real-life math topics that are currently untaught, yet useful, such as surveying, pairwise counting, and software development using artificial intelligence.


Images: integral of x squared dx, changing slope

----



section-9-details-begin

9: Terminology and precise definitions seldom convey insightful concepts

When scientists work on solving a math challenge, rarely do they think in words such as "here's a variable" and "here's the unknown quantity."  When engineers design a bridge that uses triangles for stability, they don't name the trianges as "isocoles" or "right triangle."  And only a few people remember the name "Pythagorean theorem" when they remember that, for a right triangle, the sum of the squares of the two shorter sides equals the square of the longer side.

So why do math textbooks and standardized tests put so much emphasis on terminology?

Up until a few decades ago, before videos and audio recordings became inexpensive to produce, watch, and listen to, knowledge was written in books.  An easy way to find out if a student had read a chapter in a textbook was to ask questions about the definitions of terms defined in the chapter.

For this reason, textbook authors, who were experts in their academic fields, were told to include terminology that they, the experts, did not themselves use in their own academic field.

Alas, public education, including math education, now wastes excessive amounts of textbook space and classroom time teaching terminology with carefully worded definitions.  That terminology will not be useful to most people when they are in the worlds of business, employment, travel, entertainment, preparing meals, and government.

Instead it's the concepts behind the words that are important to learn.

Earlier you learned that division is hidden in words such as proportion, scale, ratio, rate, slope, and reciprocal.  The words themselves are not needed for solving real challenges.  Yet the underlying concepts they convey are extremely valuable.

Of course there are lots of professions where terminology is very important when communicating.  Fortunately Wikipedia and artificial-intelligence services can quickly supply the correct term, and its carefully worded definition, when needed.

Math education should reduce the number of math terms being taught in school.  Let's update video and audio learning resources so they don't make the same mistake as textbooks, namely putting an excessive focus on terminology.  Instead, let's help them focus on clearly understanding the underlying concepts.


Concepts: isocoles, proper versus improper, like versus unlike
Images:

----




section-10-details-begin

10:Math testing undermines math teaching

Multiple choice tests are obsolete.  This is the next math secret.

Rather than wasting time looking at the many limitations of multiple-choice tests, let's consider the question "What will replace multiple-choice tests?"

Those tests will be replaced by computer software that uses elements of artificial intelligence to provide each and every math student with a private math tutor.  That software will be free, tiny, and capable of both teaching and testing at the same time.

This is the kind of tutoring that Alexander the Great received from Aristotle.  It's the kind of tutoring that kids from wealthy families get from privately hired math tutors.  Soon it will be free and widely available.

Math teachers have a favorite mantra to "show your work."  Well-designed software will accomplish this goal by following a student through each step the student takes.  The software will include an on-screen calculator so the software can pay attention to how it's used.

Whenever the student struggles to understand a new concept, the software will not only recognize the lack of understanding.  It will immediately give the student yet another way to understand the concept.

This development will force universities to change how they choose who to admit.  Probably universities will switch to similar software to test the mental skills of potential students.

Notice this improved testing will shift math teaching away from memorizing carefully worded definitions of advanced terminology.  Instead the focus will shift to testing whether the student has a deep understanding of fundamental math concepts.  And it will reveal mental agility to predict the student's ability to quickly learn yet more valuable concepts.

The math-testing industry has learned how to earn lots of money using multiple-choice tests.  So of course they will fight to keep their traditional testing strategies.

Ultimately this fight will be resolved as a contest between nations that prioritize testing and those that prioritize teaching.  The nations that produce the graduates who produce the most valuable innovations will win this race.

Fortunately the winners will be the nations that stop wasting time teaching obsolete math tricks, and instead focus on teaching students to understand mental skills that can transform into economically valuable inventions and innovations.  After all, that is the most important reason for spending money on public education.


Concepts: multiple-choice questions obsolete now that AI can test, must enter numeric answer to avoid trial-and-error with multiple-choice questions, each student gets different problems, lots of current test questions are about obsolete math conventions that should be taught within history of math
Images: test question with numeric answer, test question with terminology complication

----




section-11-details-begin

11: Math notation needs updating to match digital and audio technology

You've probably seen the math equation E equals M C squared.  Notice the spoken version of this equation uses the word "squared."  In contrast, the written version writes the digit two as a superscript written in a smaller font.  This difference between spoken and written math notation needs to be clearly explained to students.

Yet also, students need permission to stop writing obsolete notations.  Especially when that notation cannot be typed using a computer keyboard.  And especially now that speaking to artificial intelligence agents does not have a useful way to indicate superscript formatting, not to mention font size changes.

The secret is that the math notation taught in school needs to be updated to match how humans now communicate.  It needs to match how people speak to each other.  And it needs to match how we communicate with artificial intelligence technology, which arrived only a few years ago.

Why is this change needed?  Human communication has suddenly changed in just a few generations.  Until the early nineteen hundreds we had no convenient and affordable way to record human speech.  The best alternative was written words.

Affordable voice recording technology didn't arrive until less than a century ago.  Now, nearly every student carries a phone that easily records their voice, and any other nearby voice.  And those voice recordings can be shared instantly worldwide.

In prior centuries, writing on paper and printing on paper was the only affordable and convenient way to communicate math equations.  As a result, the notation for math equations developed in ways that are awkward to speak, yet convenient to write.  And the number of pen strokes was significant because ink pens had to be frequently dipped into an inkwell to get more ink.

A few early mechanical and electric typewriters could type a superscript on paper.  But that option disappeared when computer keyboards arrived.  Modern keyboards have no superscript key or font-size key.

We need to update some math notation conventions.  Already, computer programming languages have adopted the convention of using two asterisks to indicate raising a numeric value to a power.  This means C squared is written as C asterisk asterisk two.

Spoken communication does not have a convenient way to specify lowercase and uppercase letters.  Yet lots of math notation relies on a significant difference between lowercase and uppercase letters.

For example, in the equation E equals M C squared, the E being capitalized and the M and C being lowercase are significant.  Saying "uppercase E equals lowercase M times lowercase C squared" is awkward and distracting.

It's easier to say "energy equals mass times speed of light squared."  That takes longer to write.  That's why math notation is full of abbreviations.  And why math explanations often begin with "let E represent energy, let M equal mass, and let C equal the speed of light."

We need to begin to update math notation so it matches curent technology.

As a start, math teachers need to admit that math notation is becoming obsolete for non-math professions.  Without this secret being revealed, students assume they are to blame for struggling to learn math notation.

Scientists, mathematicians, and some engineers do need to continue to use traditional math notation.  That doesn't need to change.  But students going into other professions should be allowed to learn math concepts without insisting on only learning a notation system that is only used by scientists, mathematicians, and a few other professionals.

And we need to allow students to write the spoken version of math.  For example, "raised to the power of two" should be allowed as an alternative to using the digit two as a superscript.

Here's a bigger gap betwen written and spoken notation.  Math requires clearly indicating which group of things are related to which other group of things.  For example, this math expression uses a long horizontal line to show which values are divided by which other values.  The spoken version needs to indicate the beginning of a group of values and the corresponding end of a group of values.  Computer programming languages use parentheses for this grouping.  And the groups can be nested using nested parentheses.

Eventually new words will be adopted to clarify grouping.  As an example, the Dashrep programming lanugage uses the words "ambee" and "amenn" to indicate the beginning and ending of a nested group.  Some software developers use the words "open paren" and "close paren" to indicate grouping, but that's awkward.  And it's awkward when people speak to Siri or Alexa.

Insisting that all students must reduce the use of parentheses when they solve an algebra mystery is another huge barrier to learning the underlying concepts of algebra.  Yet that's the primary purpose of the order of operations.  These tricks to avoid writing as many parentheses was useful back when algebraic equations were written by hand using ink on paper, chalk on chalkboards, or sand or dust sprinkled on a table.  But those resource limitations are long gone.

It makes sense that college-entrance exams expect students to know the superscript notation for raising a number to a power.  That's because those tests are designed to idenfity which students have studied lots and lots of math.  But math can be learned without studying lots and lots of math.  The time spent learning nearly obsolete notation conventions would be better spent solving real-life math problems.

To make math concepts more accessible, we should allow students to choose from among a number of different notation options.  Some students may prefer the written visual options used by mathematicians.  Other students may prefer auditory spoken options, which are still being developed.  Yet other students may prefer software conventions or spreadsheet conventions.

Let students choose.  Don't insist they can only use the notation conventions used by mathematicians and scientists.

The next time you look at a math textbook and see this division sign, the one with a horizontal line and a dot above it and a dot below the line, consider that computer keyboards do not have that key.  So why do we wait until high school to give them permission to stop writing that obsolete symbol?  And why do we insist students have to remember that the letters M and C next to each other mean those numbers are multiplied?  And why can't students be allowed to write parentheses around the C squared part to indicate that calculation is done before the multiplication?

----


section-12-details-begin

12: Statistics and probability are misunderstood counting shortcuts

Suppose you don't know how to swim.  Would you choose to wade across a river that has an average depth of sixteen inches?  Would your choice change if the median depth is also sixteen inches?  Would also knowing the standard deviation help you decide?

If you have a financial investment that increases by fifteen percent, and then decreases by fifteen percent, have you gained money, lost money, or are you back to your original dollar amount?

How do you judge the difference between a thirty percent chance of rain and a fourty percent chance of showers?

Statistics courses spend lots of time teaching how to characterize lots of data by reducing it to just a few numbers.  Sometimes that's very useful.  Often it's misleading.

Consider the question about wading across a river that measures sixteen inches on average.  What you really need is a map.  Ideally it would show you the river depth at various locations.  Even better, it would be a topographic map of water depth.  Then you will know where it's safe to wade cross.  Notice the numbers for average, median, and standard deviation aren't useful for this purpose.

Averages, medians, and standard deviations serve to characterize what's called a normal distribution.  It's also called a bell curve.

Yet real life seldom involves normal distributions.  In fact, when you are trying to solve a real-life problem, it's likely a normal distribution does not apply.  If it did, the problem would be much easier to solve.  If it's easy to solve, you aren't likely to get hired solving such simple problems.

Mathematical simplicity is worth studying.  Yet this is just a beginning.

Consider the weather-related question about percent chance of rain and percent chance of showers.  A shower has lots of rain, but a rain shower covers only a relatively small area.  That shower can pass by you a few miles away.

Again what's needed is a map.  In this case a weather map.  Ideally an up-to-date radar map that shows where rain is falling.  The isolated areas of shower "activity" and their direction become easy to see, and much easier to consider for whether you need to wear a rain jacket.

Even after studying statistics, most people have to think carefully about what happens when there's an increase of fifteen percent followed by a decrease of fifteen percent.  This deeper kind of thinking is needed.  Yet lots of people who struggle with math assume the percent numbers can be added and subtracted, so they cancel out.  It takes deeper thinking to understand that an increase of fifteeen percent followed by a decrease of fifteen percent ends with a smaller number.

Numbers are great.  They give us information.  Yet numbers, especially statistics, also make it easy to believe we know more than what we actually know.

Math does not get in the way of reaching deep understanding.  Yet having numbers is just a beginning.  We constantly need to recognize what those numbers really mean.

Solving real-life problems requires gaining insights.  And insights don't come from just applying some statistics calculations.  We still need to dig deep to reach a clear understanding.

Concepts: start early, see TOC for Great Course by Grabner, seemingly exact certainty, yet not certainty.
Images:

----



section-13-details-begin

13: Geometry is beautiful except when it's used for torture

What is the area of a triangle?  The torturous way to teach the answer to this question is to teach students to memorize this formula:  "the area of a triangle is one-half its height times its base."  Most of us fail to remember this formula because geometry is about images and this formula is a very specific set of words.

So here's a simple way to draw a sketch that arrives at this formula, but without using words.  Sketch any triangle so the longest side of the triangle is at the bottom, meaning the bottom line is horizontal.  Then draw a horizontal line that goes through the top point of the rectangle.  Then draw two vertical lines that go through the points at each end of the bottom line.  You now have a rectangle that encloses the triangle.  To see how the area of the triangle compares to the area of the rectangle, draw a third vertical line that goes through the top triangle point.

Now it's easy to see the left side of the triangle is half the area of the left half of the big rectangle, and the right side of the triangle is half the area of the right side of the rectangle.  This relationship makes it obvious that you can calculate the triangle's area by first calculating the rectangle's area, and then dividing by two.

Since geometry is about lines, why does the teaching of geometry involve so many words?  And so much terminology?  And so many precise definitions?  And formal "proofs" that have words in two columns?

Video animations much more easily convey the principles of geometry.  Such animations are limited because video technology was extremely expensive to create until a few decades ago.  Now that it has become easy to create animated videos, it's time to update the teaching of geometry.

The big secret here is that geometry is much easier to understand using drawings and animations, and much harder to understand using words.

Yet geometry is taught using words because standarized tests must ask questions using words.  And because producing images and videos, until recently, required expensive resources and specialized skills.

Teaching basic geometry to young students would bring joy to their education.

For example, imagine teaching young children how to draw a five-pointed star where the five points are on a circle.  Then imagine teaching them how to draw stars with more points by measuring smaller chords within the circle.  Then imagine teaching them to choose other chord lengths that produce lines that do not return to the starting point.  Those students have just learned the concept that some numbers can produce an infinite number of lines, which gives them a graphical way to understand the concept of prime numbers.  Prime numbers have become important for creating secret codes and implementing cryptocurrency.

Yet typically schools delay teaching geometry until high school.  Why?

Young students would experience lots of joy sketching triangles, triangles within circles, and amazingly beautiful shapes.  That joy would inspire many young students to learn more about angles and lines.  That learning will make it easier to understand the terminology and notation taught in high school geometry classes.

Of course it's important to teach older students word-oriented aspects of geometry.  That can be taught in high school, when students are closer to taking college-entrance exams that require understanding that terminology, their associated precise definitions, and specialized notation that fit the limitations of standardized tests.

As an example, college-entrance tests want to know if a student understands the Pythagorean theorem.  Young students will already have learned there are multiple ways to prove the long length of a right triangle is easy to calculate because the square of that length equals the sum of the squares of the triangle's two other side lengths.  This mathematical relationship was discovered thousands of years ago, long before Pythagoreas used the new technology of writing to publish the first description of this formula.

As explained in an earlier secret, developing a clear understanding of triangles is a path to better understanding math.  Triangles are almost half the basis of geometry because two-dimensional shapes formed with straight lines can be understood as a collection of related smaller triangles.  Another big part of geometry is circles.  The basic principles should be taught early.  The notation and terminology can be taught later.

Let's take advantage of the beauty and joy of geometry.  Let's teach its fundamentals to young students in ways that convey the joy and beauty of geometry.  Later, in high school, students can learn the terminoloy, notation, and proofs that shift geometry into words that distract from its joy and beauty.

This shift in teaching is easy to achive now that computer software makes it easy to create memorable drawings and animations that convey foundational and joyful insights in the field of geometry.

----



section-closing-begin

After you learn these secrets, please share these secrets with children, students, and interested adults.

Both you and they will experience a reduced fear of math.

What will remain are these secrets, which will enable you to "do math" beyond what you currently know how to figure out.

During high school, students can finally learn the terminology, notation, and definitions that are tested on college college-entrance exams.  Most students don't need to learn those skills for doing real-life math.  Which means that after college, people in most professions can forget those terms, notations, and precise definitions.

What do these thirteen secrets have in common?  They reveal that math education follows very primitive, outdated ways of teaching math.

If you are an adult, you can apply your new understanding of math the next time you encounter the need to "do math."  If you are a teacher you can attempt to improve how math is taught.  If you are a student you can focus your attention on the important fundametals of math, and find shortcuts that make it easier to slog through the parts of math you know you won't need after you enter college.

Whatever your situation, please appreciate the joy of math now that you know where that joy is hidden.

----




section-early-education-begin

Old division symbols used when writing by hand and when typesetting a math textbook. But slash is used now.


Throughout the last couple of centuries countless students have correctly guessed they were being taught excessively rigorous details that aren't especially valuable for solving the real-life math problems they will encounter as an adult.  A big clue about this fact comes from the fact that lots of parents can't help their children with math homework.


Those are easy to teach by first limiting math exercises to the numbers negative one, negative two, negative three, negative four, and negative five.  They can encounter these simple negative numbers on a printed-on-paper ruler that extends from negative five on the left to positive five on the right, with zero in the middle.  They will learn that adding positive integers amounts to counting to the right, subtracting positive integers amounts to counting to the left, and the counting can temporarily involve the negative integers to the left of zero.  One year later they will be ready to learn the math shortcut of adding and subtracting negative numbers.


In hindsight it will become clear that what teachers have been referring to as math "problems" are 
really exercises, tasks, and puzzles.


If the math involves multiplication, it's easy to remember that multiplication is basically a shortcut for counting using big steps.  Such as counting by fives while you count on your fingers to seven, to reach the number thirty five.  That's easy, so you know when multiplication is needed.

real-life professions your calculations may involve the possibility of a bridge collapsing, or a patient dying, or losing money.

The big pattern here is that attempting to excessively simplify division leads to math confusion years later when a full understanding of division is needed to understand college-level academic subjects.


Centuries ago ancient people didn't know how to divide three by four.  So they left the fraction of three fourths as a fraction.  They wrote down the fraction as if it was a final number.

When they needed to add and subtract those fractions they developed clever tricks, such as dividing the top and bottom numbers by two, and repeating that trick as long as both numbers are even numbers.  And they looked for what we now refer to as the lowest common denominator.  Sometimes those simplifications made it much easier to add and subtract the fractions and to get a useful simpler number.  That's clever.

Briefly teaching those clever fraction tricks at a young age is a useful history lesson.  It helps children better appreciate how we do math today.

However, we now have the decimal number system.  It easily allows us to divide three by four.  The result is zero point seven five.

Are fractions obsolete?  Not at all!

When students learn to do math using a spreadsheet app, they discover fractions cannot be typed into a spreadsheet cell.  And they never see a fraction in any calculated result.

Cursive writing has been removed from school lessons because it's obsolete.  Now it's time to remove the obsolete skill of looking for common denominators in numbers expressed as fractions.

Long ago, Europeans wisely switched to measuring distances using meters, centimeters, and millimeters.  These measurements are easy to add and subtract, in the same way dollars and cents are easy to add and subtract.

Tradition!  That's the way it was done for centuries.

And it provides an excuse for teaching how to add and subtract fractions, which you now know is also foolish.

Why do math teachers waste so much time teaching how to add and subtract fractions?  Ancient Romans used Roman numerals, which were designed for addition and subtraction and simple multiplication, but not division.  So ancient Romans didn't know what to do with a calculation such as three divided by four.  So they used the fraction as if it was a useful number.  When they added fractions they sometimes got a non-fractional result, so they developed clever tricks to add and subtract fractions.  This is where the trick of finding the "lowest common denominator" comes from.  Those math tricks eventually spread to Roman-ruled England, France, and Spain, and then to America.  Knowing about this history helps us appreciate why schools don't simply teach students to convert the fraction three fourths into a single number, namely zero point seven five.

A further reason for teaching how to add and subtract fractions is that it's similar to what was called "making change."  That's a task nearly everyone in retail jobs had to learn, namely figuring out which coins to give to a customer who pays with dollar bills.  For a few decades that task was done by a cash register that automatically dispensed coins into a metal tray.  In those cases quarters, dimes, nickels, and pennies were like fractions of a dollar.

Which math event led to the Italian Renessance?  The tipping-point event happened when a new Vatican pope demonstrated he could multiply and divide much faster than Romans who still used Roman numerals.  Until then the Vatican had declared the use of Arabic numerals to be a sin.  Those are the digits we now recognize as the digits zero through nine.  For clarification, the word "Arabic" became associated with these digits because the Koran is written in Arabic and that math concept passed through Islamic culture, having come from what is now India, where digits were used to represent bead patterns on the Chinese abacus.  Faster calcuations made it practical to adopt banking systems that employed accountants in different Italian cities.  Merchants using that banking system didn't need to carry precious cargo for trading, which put lots of highway robbers out of business, which increased travel between European cities.  Remember the artist genius Leanardo da Vinci was hired by the Medici family who gained immense wealth by owning a large banking system.

Why do math professors waste so much time teaching the "order of operations"? ... Long ago, math was done using sand or dust on a table as the writing surface.  Later it was done on paper using quill pens, which frequently had to have ink added from an inkwell.  Limiting the use of paretheses was helpful, both for conserving table space and ink, and for conserving the time it took to write parenteses, or their equivalent.  Now, typing extra parentheses on a keyboard is not a concern.  The increasing number of nested paretheses is not much of a concern, especailly because many text editors show which parenthesis matches which other parenthesis.  Yet we still minimize the number of paretheses as if we were still writing using quill pens, or doing calculations on sand tables.

Expressed another way, it's like the theme in the movie and play named "Fiddler on the Roof."  In that story a younger generation asks "Why?" and the male head of the family answers with "Tradition!"

Images: Ancient Roman with sundial

To better appreciate this limitation, consider that the writers of the U.S. Constitution created the "electoral college" for choosing U.S. presidents because there was no way for most voters to hear even one speech given by even one presidential candidate.  At that time the high-tech approach for giving speeches to lots of voters was for the candidate to give their speech from the rear car of a train at each big town along the main railroad line between the northern states and southern states.  Only the "electoral college" representatives who traveled to Washington DC were able to hear the voices of all the presidential candidates.


Why were logarithms especially useful for a couple of centuries?  Even using decimal digits the task of division is time-consuming.  One shortcut is to convert both the numbers to their logarithm equivalent, add those two logarithms, then convert back to the numbers they represent.  Originally these conversions were done using printed tables of numbers.  Keeping track of where the decimal place goes is done manually, without the tables.  Later this process was simplified by inventing the slide rule.  The sliding part is aligned so the two numbers line up under the cursor line, and the left end of the sliding part points to the resulting number.  These logarithmic methods competed against expensive hand-cranked and electric-motorized mechanical calculators until the first electronic calculators became available.


Speaking of which, lots of algebra is based on the book that first described the topic, which is named ....

Just by drawing more triangles to more locations young students can create a map.  Where the lines cross are the locations of those objects.  A playground can be mapped to show the locations of trees, fenceposts, and corners of buildings.  A map of a classroom would show where the walls meet at the corners, and where the corners of big furnature items are located.  Drawing straight lines between related locations completes the unlabelled map.  And it's all done without using any numbers.

After a bit of practice with this simple surveying, students can draw more precise maps.  Then when they learn how to multiply, divide, and measure decimal inches, they will experience joy.  That's when they will discover they can measure distant distances, such as the width of a river they cannot cross, or the length of a fence they cannot walk along.  Those experiences will reveal the power of multiplication and division.

Measuring the height of a tree also uses a triangle.  It's just vertical instead of horizontal.


----




chart-description-begin

Create 2 charts showing which topics should be taught in which years of school.
Sort one by year, the other by topic.
Include pairwise counting.

----


overall-concepts-begin:

Concepts: some topics are obsolete:
* adding fractions, and other calculations with fractions
* division symbol as line with two dots

Concepts: some topics are becoming obsolete:
* order of operations
* uppercase versus lowercase distinction for letters (x versus A)

Concepts: some topics are useless in most professions:
* polynomials
* logarithms

Concepts: many topics should be taught much earlier:
* trianges and parallel lines
* angles, starting with right angle, acute angle, obtuse angle (without numbers)
* sine, cosine, tangent (using angles that have numbers)
* algebra as puzzle or mystery, starting with just addition and subtraction, then incorporate multiplication, then division

Concepts: many topics should be taught later:
* terminology for college admissions
* notation for college admissions

Concepts: some topics are missing:
* pairwise counting


----
